README.md, before:

# Computational Practices 2, Spring 2020

This course repository contains homework assignments, useful guides, and code for Computational Practices 2 at CCA, Fall 2019.

In this course, we'll engage in three mini-projects and a final project.

*Pre-project assignment*: 
1. Find two computational works and deconstruct them -- figure out what subcomponents you'd need to create or find in order to recreate the work. Upload your work to a [new GitHub repository](https://github.com/zamfi/github-guide) and [email us the link](mailto:zamfi@cca.edu,rolf.widenfelt@cca.edu).
2. Learn about JSON, aka "JavaScript Object Notation". It's a very useful way to structure data and you will come across it a lot, including in Project 1! There are a number of resources on YouTube and across the Web, but many of them will have parts that assume knowledge beyond what you have gained so far -- do not fret! Get what you can from each one, and move on. The pieces will fit together!
3. Copy the JSON data from [this document](runner.json?raw=1) into [JSON Editor Online](https://jsoneditoronline.org) and/or [JSONFormatter](https://www.jsonformatter.io), and explore what data actually shows up in there. Explore enough that you have an educated guess about the "position" of the "nose".

Project 1: Machine Learning. *January 29 - February 19.*

Project 2: JavaScript, React, and the Web. *February 19 - March 11.*

Project 3: Electronics and Robotics. *March 11 - April 8.*

Final Project: April 8 - May 9; final show *Interface*, 7pm-9:30pm, CCA Oliver Art Center (Oakland)

Commit message:

add link to json-examples

README.md, after:

# Computational Practices 2, Spring 2020

This course repository contains homework assignments, useful guides, and code for Computational Practices 2 at CCA, Fall 2019.

In this course, we'll engage in three mini-projects and a final project.

*Pre-project assignment*: 
1. Find two computational works and deconstruct them -- figure out what subcomponents you'd need to create or find in order to recreate the work. Upload your work to a [new GitHub repository](https://github.com/zamfi/github-guide) and [email us the link](mailto:zamfi@cca.edu,rolf.widenfelt@cca.edu).
2. Learn about JSON, aka "JavaScript Object Notation". It's a very useful way to structure data and you will come across it a lot, including in Project 1! First, take a look at some examples [here](json-examples-CCA.md). There are also a number of resources on YouTube and across the Web, but many of them will have parts that assume knowledge beyond what you have gained so far -- do not fret! Get what you can from each one, and move on. The pieces will fit together!
3. Copy the JSON data from [this document](runner.json?raw=1) into [JSON Editor Online](https://jsoneditoronline.org) and/or [JSONFormatter](https://www.jsonformatter.io), and explore what data actually shows up in there. Explore enough that you have an educated guess about the "position" of the "nose".

Project 1: Machine Learning. *January 29 - February 19.*

Project 2: JavaScript, React, and the Web. *February 19 - March 11.*

Project 3: Electronics and Robotics. *March 11 - April 8.*

Final Project: April 8 - May 9; final show *Interface*, 7pm-9:30pm, CCA Oliver Art Center (Oakland)
